terms:
"layer" - one of the eight graphics layers that can contribute to the color of a pixel.
 - background color
 - pivot (text / pixel)
 - sprites
 - 4 tilemaps
 - highcolor layer

"tilemap" / "tilemap layer n" ="playfield"
"clip plane" / "clip interval" / "clip window" - one of the four clipping intervals. each interval has a "left" and "right" value
"sprite group" ="sprite priority group" - sprites are split into 4 groups based on the upper 2 bits of their palette (00,40,80,C0). these can have different blend settings
"mosaic" - horizontal pixelization effect
"background color [layer]" - color drawn behind everything else (used if nothing else is displayed there)

"color" - ambiguous
"color id" ="color index" - a color in the FDP - that is, a 13-bit number, which is later used as an index into color RAM.
"palette id" - the upper bits of a color index (while the lower bits are supplied by the texture). abstractly, an object's palette selects which set of 16 (or 32, or 64) colors is used for it.
"rgb color" - an actual color, seen and blended by the FDA and output to the screen.
"color ram" / "palette ram" - the map of color numbers to rgb colors

"priority" - blending priority (determines which 2 layers are chosen for blending etc) not to be confused with sprite priority, which only matters while rendering to the framebuffer, and is mapped to priority by lineram 7600
"blend mode" - which pixels a layer contributes to (left/right/both/neither)  this is like  "priority stack-up contribution"
"blend value" / "blend alpha value" - ranges from $7 (100%) to $F (0%). $B is 50%. represents an alpha value. there are 4 of these, 2 for the left half-pixel and 2 for the right half-pixel
"alpha select" ="blend select"/"blend value select" - setting which determines which of the sets of alpha values will be used for a given layer
"half-pixel" - one of two pixels that is sent to the FDA for each screen pixel
"A and B" / "left and right" - what we call each of the half-pixels. 

note: think of it this way: priority and half-pixel are the 2 axes of the priority cell array

"priority cell" - (this is only a theory, but so far it's been useful for explaining things) believe the way the fdp handles priority is that each layer's color gets placed into an array of 2×16 "cells", corresponding to the 16 priority levels and 2 half-pixels. each cell contains: 13-bit color index, transparency flag, alpha select bit, and maybe an "invalid" flag. for each screen pixel, the fdp picks the highest non-empty cell in each column and sends their color to the fda (along with the corresponding alpha value)

"empty"/"transparent" vs "full"/"opaque" - (needs work) when talking about layer contributions  transparent means  when searching for the 2 half-pixels to send to the fda, we ignore those cells.  i dont like transparent/opaque because they sound like an alpha thing  like F=transparent 7=opaque.  so i think "empty priority cell" is maybe correct  egh.. 

"sprite list" containing "sprite list entrys"/"slots?"
"tile" is the thing that the tilemap is composed of. i.e. the 32-bit value and the abstract concept.  we will call the texture that we refer to  maybe "character" or "chip" or "texture" or something... so a tile Contains a character index among other things, etc.
the thing that the tilemap is composed of, represented by a 32-bit value in the tilemap data (

"tile" - does this mean one of the cells within the tilemap (i.e. the 32 bit value containing the tile id, palette, etc.) or does it mean the texture (hence "tile id")? this is a problem we need to resolve. Either: we call the data "tiles" and we MUST stop saying "tile id" (perhaps should be called "character id" or "glyph id" or "texture id" or something) or we call them "cells" or something else, and then "tile id" is ok to say (because tile means the texture)

"sprite" - ambiguous
"sprite list" - the list in graphics ram which the sprites are rendered from
"sprite [list] entry" - one item in the sprite list, consisting of 8 words

"tile" - the thing that a tilemap/pivot layer is composed of, represented by 32/16 bits in graphics ram

"texture" ="character" - the bitmap that a sprite, tilemap tile, or text cell is rendered from.

"pivot layer" - one of the graphics layers. 64x64 grid of 8x8px tiles, with textures defined in RAM.
this layer has 2 modes: "text mode" and "pixel mode", which affect how textures are mapped to the tiles.
 in "text mode", a tile's texture is chosen based on its texture id, from a set of 256 textures.
 in "pixel mode", each tile in the first 32 rows (the bottom half of the layer reuses the same data) references a distinct texture, effectively creating a 512x256 bitmap image (though the pixels are in a strange order)
 note that the palette and flip attributes function the same in either mode.

note: taito calls sprites "object"/"OBJ" and tilemaps "screen"/"SCR". i've elected not to use these names.

"highcolor layer" ="mystery layer" - (todo: copy my definition i already wrote)

"scroll" - the position of a tilemap. this is controlled by 2 components: the "global scroll" (set by the scroll registers) and a "local scroll" offset per-scanline (we have called the x component "rowscroll" and the y "colscroll", but i think these are misnomers). (also do you ever think about how we only use "scroll" to describe the position of tilemap, not sprites? welll  i guess how i would think of it is, scroll controls the position of an entire group of things, as it does with sprites. while position means the position of the things within that group (so, the coordinates of a tile, or the position of an individual sprite))

"zoom" ="scale" - stretching applied to a tilemap or sprite. for some reason we use "scale" for tilemap and "zoom" for sprites.

"x"/"horizontal" - todo: decide when/if to use each of these
"y"/"vertical" - same

"data" - when we want to refer to e.g. "tilemap 0" vs "tilemap 0's data". or the location of the pivot layer's pixel data. 

"address"/"location"  for some reason i have been saying location to mean address, not sure why. need to be consistent.

pivot layer: pixel data address. say this 5 times fast.

"index" - location /within/ a thing (e.g. "x index" - position along the x axis, "palette index" (if we used this) index within the palette.)
"id"/"number" - location /of/ a thing within its list. e.g. "tilemap id" or "texture id"
"offset" - do we use this? or is it always redundant.  "scroll horizontal offset" is just "horizontal scroll"

"nth bit" / "bit n" - the lsb is the 0th bit. e.g. "bit 4" is the same as the mask 0x10

"up/down" (and the like) - the y/vertical axis
"left/right" (etc.) - the x/horizontal axis
"front/back" "/behind" (etc.) - the z/priority/draw-order pseudo-axis

TODO: - need terms to differentiate rendering sprites to the framebuffer vs rendering the framebuffer to the screen (e.g. "rendering" vs "displaying" or something)
